# Carbon pricing and planetary boundaries

This repository contains model code for the paper "Carbon pricing and planetary boundaries".

## Model

This notebook provides a numerical simulation of the effect of a potential carbon tax on variables which have been identified as 
key drivers of the processes underlying the planetary boundaries (PB) framework. The model, upon which we base our analysis, is set up along the lines of a standard economic textbook model of decentralized competitive economy where firms and consumers have preferences over outcomes and each solve maximization problems by engaging in trade with each other. The sectors (or economic actors) we have included are those that we have identified as being central drivers of the processes underlying the PB's these include e.g. the production of fossil fuel, fertilizer, agriculture, timber, water and fisheries.  To study the implications of a carbon tax within this setting we have proceeded along the following lines:
1. Characterize the problem each economic actor is trying to solve given their preferences, technology and constraints.
2. Derive the corresponding first order conditions for each actor.
3. From the first order conditions characterize the equilibrium allocation only in terms of the model variables (i.e. eliminate prices) 
4. Derive the comparitive statics of the effect of a carbon tax i.e. differentiate the equilibrium allocation fully with respect to the carbon tax.

The resulting equilibrium outcome thus indirectly reveals how each variable in the model responds to a carbon tax.

## Code

All results can be produced in the paper can be generated by running by highlighting each code cell in this notebook and clicking the "run" for each cell  
in consecutive order. Further comments are provided in conjunction to the cells below. 

The web_model directory contains the code for solving the model (model.py), generating latex tables (pb_table_generator.py) and parameters (params.py).


## Requirements

This code has been tested on a Mac version 10.14.4 with Python 3.7, Pandas version 0.23.4 and Numpy version 1.15.1. Auxillary Pandas and Numpy packages are not included in the standard library and must be installed seperately. 


## Installation guide

Python installation instructions can be found here: https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html
Pandas and Numpy can be installed using pip.

Pandas: https://pypi.org/project/pandas/ 

Numpy: https://pypi.org/project/numpy/

Running the code in the ipynb file also requires Jupyter Notebook to be installed. See:
https://jupyter.org/install

Note: typical install time should be less than 30 min.

## Demo and instructions

The results found in the paper "Carbon pricing and planetary boundaries" can be generated using the code in the Jupyter Notebook "PB-simulation_Nature_Communications - Final.ipynb". Expected output should match. Runtime should be around 10 minutes on a standard notebook. Further instructions and comments can be found in the code.

